Title: Clark does it again
Date: Thursday Sept  17 21:08:18 EDT 2015
Authors: 3

**Plagiarism – Really?**
------------------------

Reading [Clark's essay on Paine’s Rights of Man in the 9/16/15 issue
of the Times Literary
Supplement](http://www.the-tls.co.uk/tls/public/article1607570.ece)
reminds me of a small dog nipping at the heels of a passing
steed. History is passing Clark by, and he does not accept the fall of
monarchism, and the demon Paine who precipitated the fall. Clark has
an ideological approach to Paine, evidenced by a recent essay similar
in dubious content and tone, “Thomas Paine: The English Dimension”
([reviewed
here](http://www.thomaspaine.org/aboutpaine/burying-thomas-paine.html)). He
described the English government in 1792 as ""the most famous and
successful example of the representative system, the Westminster
Parliament, was already operative in the Britain that Paine rejected
with hatred." (in his essay in Selected Writings of Thomas Paine,
Shapiro and Calvert, eds., Yale U. Press, 2014). No reason for the
reforms of 1832, it was the most successful “representative” form! The
rotten boroughs, the autocratic repression, the endless wars, the
oppressive poverty. Quite successful. And Rights of Man was the death
knell for monarchism, the system cherished by Clark.


So as an historian, Clark strains to find a soft underbelly to take
apart Rights of Man. And he thinks he has found it in a few pages
describing the events of the beginning of the French Revolution. The
reprint in other publications around the world from the Times Literary
Supplement use a headline about “plagiarism” accompanying TLS’s use of
most slanderous cartoon from George III’s reign ridiculing Paine’s
looks and supposed profession (as a teenager Paine apprenticed as a
staymaker, but only worked at it for a couple of years, and the Crown
propaganda machine insists in linking that to his vocation), and which
accompanies a carefully placed quote in Clark’s essay containing
"wretched was the condition of a disrespected man" from an admittedly
uncertain source - more like yellow journalism than a “literary”
publication.

It was the Institute for Thomas Paine Studies at Iona College in New
York that confirmed that this passage was mostly written by Lafayette,
not an unusual practice of collaborative thinkers in the period, as
Clark should be aware. Lafayette was fully aware and proud (as Clark
confirms) to be part of Paine’s epic tome, hardly a plagiaristic
scenario. Paine, Jefferson, and Lafayette spent weeks together in the
late 1780s discussing the emerging revolutionary political philosophy
taking shape in the trans-Atlantic atmosphere, and there is data to
suggest Jefferson also had a hand in these few pages. But Clark makes
this accounting of an historical event a "foundational episode" in
Rights of Man, when in fact it merely sets the stage for the
philosophy of government and human rights that has made Rights of Man
central to the world movement for justice, liberty, and democracy -
all movements against the archaic and reactionary philosophy of 1792
monarchism. I know Clark has credentials, but at what point does
academia ask about his motives, and cherry-picked manipulation of
historical details? Clark would discount the accuracy of these pages
because they didn’t come directly from the mind of Paine, a man he
diminishes at every chance, and dismisses as irrelevant at every
opportunity. A first-hand account from the most capable eyewitness in
the world at that time is a valuable piece of literature to use. And
Paine did so properly, never pretending to have been standing in Paris
as these events unfolded.

Clark has come up wanting one more time, demonstrating he will
double-down on his “English Dimension” misinterpretation. Yes,
“Historians have much re-thinking to do” about J.C.D. Clark.

Gary Berton

Secretary, Thomas Paine National Historical Association


