Title: A London Obituary of Thomas Paine
Date: Tuesday Dec  1 21:08:18 EDT 2015
Authors: 3

*Written soon after learning of his death, probably in the summer of
1809, author unknown:*

"The biography of Mr. Thomas Paine is known, he was of low origin but
even in his youth of a strong, resolute and constant temper. He had
from his infancy adopted the opinions he so successfully promulgated
in his manhood. All his literary productions evince an acute,
profound, determined mind; his language is simple, accurate and
nervous, adapted to all capacities, so pointed and unequivocal that
there is no misconceiving it; he is sententious; his axioms are
incontrovertible, and their impression indelible. No human being’s
efforts have done more for liberty; he made more converts than Sydney
or Russel. His “Common Sense” enfranchised America. America was
divided into two parties; the argument of this little pamphlet decided
the contest. His “Rights of Man” had a nearly similar effect in
England. Innumerable replies have appeared against it; but so weak and
futile as to injure the cause they meant to sustain. He reasoned from
facts, and his distinction was irresistible; he poured like a torrent
and bears down every thing before him; he was prosecuted for his
works, but they are so admired they are in every library. He seemed
stern and morose but he was lenient, friendly, and benevolent. He
instances his humanity by his resolute vote to save the king’s
life. The sanguinary Robespierre never forgave him. In the reign of
terror, Robespierre imprisoned him, but the apostle of liberty, though
in such imminent danger, never retracted his opinions, or solicited
mercy; it pleased providence that he should escape this monster. Bold,
manly, and fearless, he never concealed his sentiments: positive and
inflexible they never varied. He continued in Paris long after
Bonaparte rendered himself supreme in the state, and spoke as freely
as ever. He told the writer of this article at Paris, on the peace of
Amiens, that he was preparing for America; that he could not reside in
comfort in the dominions of Bonaparte; that if he was to govern like
an angel, he should always remember that he had perjured himself; that
he had heard him himself swear that France should be a pure republic;
and that he would die rather than endure the authority of a single
individual; he would end his days in America, for he thought there was
no liberty any where else. There he soon went, and there he paid the
debt of nature; but his memory will never perish."


