Title: Burying Thomas Paine
Slug: aboutpaine/burying-thomas-paine
Date: Sun Jan  11 09:08:51 EDT 2015


**A critique of J.C.D. Clark’s article, "Thomas Paine: The English Dimension" (an essay in the *Selected Writings of Thomas Paine*, Shapiro and Calvert, eds., Yale U. Press, 2014)**

By Gary Berton  
Secretary, Thomas Paine National Historical Association  
Coordinator, Institute for Thomas Paine Studies  


The great historian E. H. Carr
[said](http://www.cooperativeindividualism.org/carr-edward_historian-and-his-facts-1961.html),
"By and large, the historian will get the kind of facts he
wants. History means interpretation."  In an essay published as part
of a new collection of writings by and about Thomas Paine (*Selected
Writings of Thomas Paine*, Yale U. Press, 2014), J. C. D. Clark has
pushed this premise to absurd limits.

In contradistinction to the rest of the book, which contains a
selection of primarily major works of Thomas Paine, Clark tries to
refute any influence Paine had on the world, and scolds scholars for
claiming he did. There is a long history of marginalizing Thomas Paine
by conservative historians, from Jared Sparks to Forest MacDonald to
David McCulloch. Clark’s essay is the latest. In an awkward
juxtaposition with Paine’s own writings, Clark questions the need to
read Paine at all.


[The Thomas Paine National Historical
Association](http://thomaspaine.org) and the [Institute for Thomas
Paine Studies at Iona
College](http://www.iona.edu/About/Iona-in-Community/Institute-for-Thomas-Paine-Studies.aspx)
knew about the preparation for this book through Clark himself, who
attended the 2012 Conference on Paine Studies at Iona. He was eager to
refute the originality, impact and significance of Paine. He latched
onto the Institute's Text Analysis Project, hoping to refute the
authorship of as many of Paine’s attributed works as possible.  His
list of disputed works was exaggerated, however.

Despite better advice, the editors of *Selected Writings of Thomas
Paine* went ahead and put *Thoughts on Defensive War* as their first
selection, with the note that its "attribution has never been
questioned". The Institute questioned this in writing to
Dr. Clark. And Clark himself makes reference to linguistic studies of
Paine’s writings without ever acknowledging the Institute as the
source, or the Institute's complete analysis of the documents. But
this a minor flaw compared to Dr. Clark’s essay, which is full of
vitriol and demonstrably false statements about Thomas Paine, unworthy
of a scholarly presentation. There is a chip on Clark’s shoulder which
has tilted his stance, and it comes from the long tradition of
conservative historians who have repeatedly tried to bury
Paine. Perhaps Clark's forthcoming book will provide evidence
otherwise lacking in his essay *Thomas Paine: The English Dimension*.

Clark organizes his attack on Paine in the disguise of an "historic
Paine" versus a "usable Paine". To Clark, "historic" means the actual
Paine he will supposedly define for us untouched by ideology. "Usable"
means how other scholars, with a political leaning (unlike him),
incorrectly appraised Paine in the past. Clark is to raise the
questions and reveal the truth which everyone has missed because of
ideological blinders. He will set us all on the correct path of
dethroning Paine from his lofty perch. Unfortunately, Clark falls prey
to the very thing he attacks – prolepsism: imposing one’s own views
and prejudices upon a previous historical era and searching for
evidence, often invented, to justify one’s views.

At the 2012 Thomas Paine Studies Conference, Clark, from the
University of Kansas, did not submit an abstract yet attended
anyway. He was given time to speak in deference to his reputation. He
talked about what direction Paine Studies should take, but he was
never clear upon what "direction" meant. It subsequently became
clear. He was there to gather pieces of evidence to show there really
shouldn’t be any Paine studies (other than finding reasons to dismiss
him) because he believed Paine never said or thought anything original
and his influence was marginal at best. His motives became evident
when he declared "you can’t prove Paine was against the death
penalty", though all of the writings which documented Paine's stance
were listed. He went on to the issues of women’s rights and the
abolition of slavery, where there was some disagreement - Paine never
made these subjects the focus of his writings despite his personal
views in support of them. But Clark pushed it further, and it was
apparent where he was going. He arrived there finally with his essay.

In this essay, which stands in stark contrast to the reasoned,
balanced introduction by Ian Shapiro, Clark begins by briefly
examining why American scholarship of Paine outstrips British and
French scholarship, and he blithely deals with it thus: "...there is
some academic attention to Paine in France and Britain, but [there is]
a major Paine industry in the United States". The explanation is clear:
in the United States Paine was swept up into the republic’s ’myth of
origins.’ Many academics still implicitly treat Paine as an American
whose primary significance is for that society’s present-day ‘civil
religion’."  Leaving aside for the moment the Americanism of Paine, it
is evident Clark's relocation to Kansas (he was originally at Oxford)
was a shock, witnessing the attention Paine is receiving here in
comparison to Britain. Clark assumes there is some mania over Paine
due to a myth of "civil religion" and a "myth of origins", neither of
which he accepts. But Paine was kept out of the "myth" of America’s
origins for 200 years, he was not part of it, and was deliberately
left out of it. Look at the 19th (and most 20th) century books written
about the founding of America: nowhere is Paine part of the "myth of
origins". He has been marginalized, slandered, reduced to a quirky,
disheveled side-line pamphleteer at best. Perhaps because he was not
part of this myth creation story scholars finally asked why a man of
such crucial importance to American history is left out of
textbooks. I know that is why I started my scholarship on Paine 45
years ago. It is fair to attack the American myth of origins, but
Clark accepts the conservative myths, which dominate, without
question. What he doesn’t accept is any basis which shows there was a
radical trend in the founding of the country.

As to Paine’s "primary significance" to academics in his use of
promoting "civil religion", the reference he makes in his footnote is
to an essay by Bellah in Daedalus which refutes his point. Bellah
excludes Paine from the founders who would be happy to create a
non-specific religious creed acceptable for civil society. To Bellah,
Paine is the exception to this civil religion which sought to coexist
with Christianity, unlike the other leading founders – Franklin,
Jefferson, Washington and others. (It is a separate question whether
Bellah is correct in putting Franklin and Jefferson on his list in NOT
favoring an end to organized religion – see [Nature’s
God](http://www.amazon.com/Natures-God-Heretical-American-Republic/dp/0393064549)
by Matthew Stewart.) Paine is not an example of founders favoring the
parallel existence of civil religion as Clark is posing him (although
Clark clearly opposes Paine’s designation as a founder). So this does
not explain why North American scholars are researching Paine. Clark’s
disdain for American research, which he refers to as the "Paine
industry", arises in his belief Paine never ever acted as an American,
nor an internationalist, but only as a befuddled, dogmatic Englishman.


Although to Clark’s credit, he does point out correctly the use which
American propaganda makes of Paine concerning the country's
founding. But this does not explain the scholarship which preceded
such propaganda. The propaganda began with Reagan, who decided to make
use of Paine after the 200 year forced exile from academia. The
breakthrough scholarship began with Alfred Young and Staughton Lynd in
the 60’s, gained traction with Aldridge and Claeys in the 80’s
(although Claeys’ scholarship is based from England not America), and
E. Foner in the same period. After establishing and reanimating Paine
based on these works, Paine studies increased to the dismay of
Clark. He wanted Paine left buried in obscurity, as he is in England.


At least Clark is honest. Most conservative historians simply neglect
and marginalize. Clark comes right out as a defender of the status
quo, and he exposes his ideology when he states: "the most famous and
successful example of the representative system, the Westminster
Parliament, was already operative in the Britain that Paine rejected
with hatred." Meaning, there was no need to alter the British system
of government in the 1790s! It was the "most successful"
representative structure! ("Successful" for whom?) No need for the
Reform Act of 1832, as small a step as it was. Certainly no need for a
*Rights of Man*. No wonder Paine draws Clark’s ire.

###Enlightenment thinking

The ensuing lecture from Clark lays out a series of negative rebuttals
to Paine’s worth. The first is the concept that "Since the idea of
‘the Enlightenment’ was absent in Paine’s lifetime, his society’s
reforming causes were not united under any overarching ideology: many
campaigns or crusades were therefore missing from the historic Paine’s
commitments that later commentators expected to find there." Clark
declares academics "proleptic", inventing ideas and placing them in
Paine’s head. Yes, academics have labelled the historic process
(philosophic, social, intellectual, political) the "Enlightenment"
because they needed a term (much like "civil religion") to describe a
real phenomenon. Just as Washington, Franklin and Jefferson did not
know the term "civil religion" but promoted the concept without being
aware of future conceptualizations, so too can people join the
phenomenon of "Enlightenment" thinking without being aware of future
designations. One does not negate the other. Clark is demonstrating
idealist thinking, where the concept being made conscious determines
its existence. The Enlightenment is the belief that science and reason
are the real source of knowledge and understanding instead of religion
and tradition.  This is exactly Paine’s philosophy – opposition to
organized religion and to the dependence on the traditions of
hereditary government. According to Clark, Spinoza, for example, could
not have advocated for Enlightenment thinking because he did not know
the term – just ignore all the passages about reason, an objective
material world, the role of science in human society. Spinoza wasn’t
aware of 20th century conceptualizations of his period, so he could
not have been part of the Enlightenment?

Clark is attacking the "misinterpretations" of scholars in leaping to
link Paine to 19th century movements that carried into present
day. While there are certain exaggerations in some interpretations,
Clark is wrong on substance throughout all his negatives. Take the
Enlightenment for example: there were references to self-knowledge
about this revolution in thinking, well-documented by Jonathan
Israel. The French were even referring to it as the "luminere" before
Paine was born, and like-minded Enlightenment thinkers found each
other, like the Encyclopedists. That demonstrates some common
philosophy with common goals. We now know it as the Enlightenment,
back then they knew they shared the same world outlook. And Paine’s
core tenets fit exactly into this Enlightenment period. Clark is
grasping at straws to try and prove a thesis which is unsustainable.

Clark's thesis is: Paine’s "mindset, values, and frame of reference
remained largely those of an English freethinker of the reign of
George II, confidently repeating his religious teaching and its
political consequences in the new situations into which he blundered."
(Notice the use of "blundered", a repeated pattern throughout the
essay of denigrating Paine.) In order to maintain this thesis, Clark
must negate the core of what Paine wrote because it does not fit into
his own misinterpretation.

Clark denies Paine’s relevance by showing Paine was not aware of
movements like socialism, democracy, or Enlightenment thinking, and
then denying Paine ever had a philosophy which linked to them
anyway. In his denials he reduces Paine to an English yeoman,
half-educated in the 1750’s intellectual trends, who never progressed
past them. But to accomplish that, Clark must also deny reality, and
the reality of the content of Paine’s writings.


###Suffrage and constitutions



Let’s start with the most egregious insult to both Paine’s legacy and
the scholars who have meticulously uncovered it, in his depiction of
Paine’s lack of democratic ideals. Clark uses the tactic of attacking
the strength of an opponent by hitting Paine on the issue of voting
and constitutions:



"Was Paine a democrat? True, he always favored a wide franchise, but
on older premises he generally held that ‘men’ (ignoring women) were
entitled to vote as taxpayers or property owners rather than as
individuals." (The women’s rights issue is dealt with
below.) Clark read every word of Paine looking for tidbits to feed his
theories, but a simple read of *Dissertation on the First Principles
of Government* would have shown him the falsity of his statement:



> "Personal rights, of which the right of voting for representatives
   is one, are a species of property of the most sacred kind: and he
   that would employ his pecuniary property, or presume upon the
   influence it gives him, to dispossess or rob another of his
   property or rights, uses that pecuniary property as he would use
   fire-arms, and merits to have it taken from him."

  

> "Whenever it be made an article of a constitution, or a law, that
   the right of voting, or of electing and being elected, shall
   appertain exclusively to persons possessing a certain quantity of
   property, be it little or much, it is a combination of the persons
   possessing that quantity to exclude those who do not possess the
   same quantity. It is investing themselves with powers as a
   self-created part of society, to the exclusion of the rest."


> "In any view of the case it is dangerous and impolitic, sometimes
   ridiculous, and always unjust to make property the criterion of the
   right of voting."



Instead, Clark grabs onto obscure statements taken out of context to
prove his negative view, like the franchise should be as "universal as
taxation" from *Rights of Man*. The quote is part of Paine’s analysis
of the fight between Fox and Pitt over the rights of Parliament:
"With respect to the House of Commons, it is elected but by a small
part of the nation; but were the election as universal as taxation,
which it ought to be, it would still be only the organ of the nation,
and cannot possess inherent rights." Paine divided taxations into two
parts, direct and indirect. He made this point clearly in
*Dissertation on the First Principles of Government* where all
consumers pay an indirect tax. The phrase used shows nothing, but
that’s the best Clark’s biased hunt could come up with.



On women’s rights, Clark should have taken time to read an essay by
Eileen Hunt Botting in the same book his essay appears, who gives a
scholarly analysis of the question, summarizing thus: "Much of what
Paine argued in the latter part of his career, especially in *Rights
of Man, Part the Second*(1792) and *Agrarian Justice* (1797), either
explicitly or implicitly endorses women’s equal rights with men,
especially welfare rights but also political rights such as suffrage."
This does not fit Clark’s thesis so he ignores it. It would be hard to
find women’s rights in the 1750 English countryside, or universal male
suffrage not based on property qualifications, so when facts disagree
with his imagined thesis, to Clark, they can’t be valid.



To an unprejudiced mind, Paine’s philosophy on suffrage would be plain
enough. And this view of voting rights is central to Paine’s political
philosophy, as is his theory of constitutions. But Clark also states:
"It has now been established that Paine had no hand in drafting the
Pennsylvania constitution of 1776, whose extensive franchise is still
sometimes taken as demonstrating his views."  Paine did have a strong
hand in that Constitution. The "established" reference is to P. Foner
who remarked that Paine had left for the war before the actual writing
of the constitution. But the philosophy and even the structure of the
1776 constitution rest on Paine’s fourth Forester letter and *Four
Letters on Interesting Subjects*, the letters being left behind as the
model for the constitution as he was enlisting in the army. [*Four
Letters* has been verified by the Institute for Thomas Paine Studies’
Text Analysis Project as clearly Paine’s work, as Aldridge
anticipated.] And Paine took the Pennsylvania Constitution as the
model for the French Constitution of 1793. By dismissing Paine’s link
to revolutionizing the nature of constitutions with this off-hand
remark, Clark avoids having to deal with the immense impact Paine had
in this area. [See Robin West’s [*Tom Paine’s
Constitution*](http://scholarship.law.georgetown.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1285&context=facpub)
for an analysis of the democratic road not travelled in America.]



Paine’s theory of constitutions is the most democratic form ever
devised, but Clark would prohibit us from calling it democratic
because Paine didn’t know the word. The features of the 76
Pennsylvania Constitution can be found in the *Four Letters* article,
and also in *To the People* and *Candid and Critical Remarks on a
Letter signed Ludlow*, the latter of which Clark tried to de-attribute
from Paine as well, but was tested to be Paine’s. The public debate
between the radicals and the moderates in Philadelphia, to present a
model constitution for the rest of America, had Paine at the center,
and the radicals won. I won’t belabor the point here by listing the
structure of the Pennsylvania constitution and these articles, but any
reasonable scholar can discern Paine’s clear influence on the
former. Issues like a plural executive, unicameralism (more on this
below), a Bill of Rights reflecting natural rights, etc., all begin
with Paine popularizing these democratic issues. All the public
debates on Constitutions in the spring of 1776 - from Tiberius to Cato to
Forester - all center on *Common Sense*.



Constitutional theory is one of Paine’s greatest contributions to
political philosophy, and to democratic structures. To dismiss it like
Clark does is not being honest or accurate. But he couldn’t find this
new theory of constitutions in 1750 England, so he had to flippantly
dispose of it.


###Class and labor



The same can be said of Clark’s labored attempt to sever any
connection between Paine and the emerging labor movement. His claim
that "Paine’s economics thus had nothing to do with the new doctrine
of socialism, which emerged only in the 1820’s" while technically true
is used by Clark not only to scold academics who link Paine to that
emerging ideology, but to denigrate Paine’s motivations and world
view. To Clark, Paine "did not conceive of ‘the working class’ or any
synonym for it, and did not defend such a reification." To Clark, all
that exists is "Paine’s very English ambition ... to become a small
freeholder, an independent yeoman ... although a failure as a farmer
in America." [Another in a long list of vitriolic characterizations
from Clark – Paine took up farming at age 67, in retirement, and was
too old for the work until he had a stroke 2 years after. Clark calls
that a "failure".]  Clark’s claims that since ‘class’ was an unknown
concept in Paine’s day, there couldn’t have been class views, class
interests, or class contradictions. Another idealist position. Clark
gloats over the fact that in academia (at least in Kansas) there
exists the "progressive weakening of the politics of class in recent
decades" and then states that "a language [of class] was devised only
after Paine’s lifetime."  If Clark had properly studied Paine, he
would have noticed a letter in 1778 to Henry Laurens:

> To Henry Laurens Spring 1778
> 
> As we are forming government on a new system, that of representation I will give you my thoughts on the various classes and merits of men in society so far as relates to each other.
> 
> The first useful class of citizens are the farmers and cultivators. These may be called citizens of the first necessity, because every thing comes originally from the earth.
> 
> After these follow the various orders of manufacturers and mechanics of every kind. These differ from the first class in this particular, that they contribute to the accommodation rather than to the first necessities of life.
> 
> Next follow those called merchants and shopkeepers. These are convenient but not important. They produce nothing themselves as the two first classes do, but employ their time in exchanging one thing for another and living by the profits.
> 
> Perhaps you will say that in this classification of citizens I have marked no place for myself; that I am neither farmer, mechanic, merchant nor shopkeeper. I believe, however, I am of the first class. I am a farmer of thoughts, and all the crops I raise I give away. I please myself with making you a present of the thoughts in this letter.
> 
> THOMAS PAINE.

And as a "farmer of thoughts" he was no failure.

Clark states the obvious that Paine did not know the word
"socialism". But Clark uses this to negate scholars who tie Paine to
the socialist movement. When Paine wrote: "This is putting the matter
on a general principle, and perhaps it is best to do so; for if we
examine the case minutely it will be found that the accumulation of
personal property is, in many instances, the effect of paying too
little for the labor that produced it; the consequence of which is
that the working hand perishes in old age, and the employer abounds in
affluence." (*Agrarian Justice*), he was not planning the socialist
revolution, but he was contributing to the labor movement which
evolved into the socialist movement. Why divorce his contribution to
that growing consciousness among workers? He was the most influential
writer in his time to the ordinary laboring and dispossessed people,
he wrote directly to them and contributed to the awakening in them to
their rights, individually and collectively. Because he didn’t know
the term ‘socialism’ does not diminish his influence in the
movement. There is a firm reason why the early unions of New York City
hosted and toasted Paine. While the politics of class struggle mostly
passed Paine by just before his death (as Alfred Young points out), it
doesn’t mean workers (or mechanics or artisans) were not aware of his
contributions at the time.

Clark makes similar arguments about "liberalism" and "radicalism". He
accuses scholars of drawing links to Paine, and then denying Paine did
anything that advances these trends. The method is consistent
throughout.

Clark even questions Paine’s uncompromising attack on monarchy. He
reduces Paine to favoring one group of monarchs over another. "Paine’s
mind was formed in the decades before 1760, years in which the
legitimacy of monarchy was framed almost wholly as a dynastic
alternative between the houses of Hanover and Stuart, not between
monarchy as such and republicanism." I guess all the passages in
*Common Sense*, *Rights of Man*, *Address to the Addressers*, etc., were to
get the Stuarts back on the throne?  Paine’s watershed stance against
monarchy was an historical leap. All the other reformers and
Dissenters in the 1770s never broke with monarchy completely – Price,
Cartwright, Burgh, Priestley and their precursors Locke and
Montesquieu, wanted only reform of monarchy, giving more power to
others, especially the emerging mercantile classes. It was Paine in
*Common Sense* that caused the crack in the dam of political thinking
which couldn’t be mended – no compromise with monarchy on
principle. Breaking with the unquestioned traditions of hereditary
rule and organized religion completely, and not in small reformist
steps, was a major contribution of Paine, and it is what made him
revolutionary.

###Poverty

Clark makes the unsupported claim that "Poverty was not central to his
[Paine’s] political thought."  Let’s look at how poverty was central
to his political thought:

> "It is not charity but a right, not bounty but justice, that I am
>  pleading for.  The present state of civilization is as odious as it
>  is unjust. It is absolutely the opposite of what it should be, and it
>  is necessary that a revolution should be made in it. The contrast of
>  affluence and wretchedness continually meeting and offending the eye,
>  is like dead and living bodies chained together." *Agrarian Justice*



The existence of poverty, which Paine declared increases with the
advance of civilization, was the central focus of his attacks on
monarchy. His politics and remedies all centered on ending
poverty. The plans in *Rights of Man* and *Agrarian Justice*, for
instance, present concrete ways to at least alleviate the issue, to
curb the accumulation of wealth to benefit society.



> "All accumulation, therefore, of personal property, beyond what a
>  man's own hands produce, is derived to him by living in society; and
>  he owes on every principle of justice, of gratitude, and of
>  civilization, a part of that accumulation back again to society from
>  whence the whole came." *Agrarian Justice*



Clark claims that "Even his program of social security chiefly
extended the practice of English poor relief in his youth," and "Paine
had been a member of the vestry of St. Michal’s parish, and was
involved in the regular payments to the poor," to try and show no
original thought. But again he obscures the main point: Paine sought
to make government, not private charity, the means to solve the
problem, government intervention to redistribute wealth. The last
phrase is a modern description of what Paine did, eventually creating
the basis for social democracy and the welfare state by popularizing
this new approach to government.



Poverty was not seen as endemic to capitalist production by Paine,
obviously, even though he made reference to workers not getting fair
value in a previous quote. He did show the sources of poverty lie in
unfair compensation, tax policies, and theft of land. Capitalism had
not matured to industrial capitalism, the systemic impoverishment of
populations by the new system had not emerged fully, yet still, the
problem of poverty appears throughout Paine’s writings from Europe,
and is repeatedly targeted as the problem that cannot be solved by
monarchy. Monarchy and hereditary succession were the immediate
obstacles to human progress (along with their religious
organizations). That was what Paine was dealing with. Yet the seeds in
the arguments to overthrow monarchy as a system and mindset did grow
into movements on other fronts once the lid on Pandora’s box was
removed, and Paine was ever present in postulating new approaches and
new concepts to advance humanity’s condition. By popularizing, to the
majority of the people, the issues of the new age, Paine played a
pivotal role in the mass politics of the new era that carried into the
19th century movements.


###American Revolution



Clark even tries to make the case Paine had no idea what was going on
in America in 1776, that the impact of *Common Sense* was exaggerated,
and it did not have wide distribution. No evidence is given except to
mention *Common Sense* was only reprinted as a pamphlet in 7 of the 13
colonies. Of course he neglects all the newspaper reprints, all the
comments in newspapers about *Common Sense* from every state, the 96
declarations of independence based on the language of *Common Sense*
written from every state, etc. He makes fun of the 500,000 copies
figure some scholars used, but fails to say it included foreign
printings where French editions outpaced American.



By confusing the motives of scholars with the objective role historic
people play should immediately discount Clark’s ideas, as his
English-centric (to the exclusion of everything else) model has
ideological fingerprints all over it, from hands that have used these
marginalization techniques against Paine for 200 years. In an attempt
to lecture uncontrollable scholars, Clark has an eye to downgrade
Paine’s role in history, and his dismissive terminology demonstrates
this: Clark refers to Paine "blundering" into situations and applying
his disjunctive ideas to alien phenomenon; Clark declares that "*Common
Sense* was more of a bitter negation of his homeland" than a blueprint
for American society, "bitter" being a slander taken from the book
about former Englishmen trying to get even with their mother country;
"Paine failed in a project of universal citizenship" is a claim made
by Clark after declaring Paine could never separate himself from the
culture of parochial England; Clark claims throughout Paine never
learned anything outside of his first two decades in the English
countryside, a preposterous claim, but slanderous in its presentation;
"Paine was out of his depth in the French Revolution"; "a failure as a
farmer in America"; "the society that developed [in America] after
1776, Paine understood little."; and "Paine’s ideas are seldom now
employed functionally to solve present-day problems."



This last brusque statement is another flaw running throughout Clark’s
analysis – because the world did not follow Paine’s philosophy, he had
no influence. Because Britain followed the monarchical representative
system and not Paine’s system, he had no influence; since America had
a bicameral system, Paine had no influence in America; since the
French Revolution devolved into tyranny, Paine was irrelevant,
etc. Clark confuses the movements to challenge the status quos with
the status quo. Paine has been the inspiration for many progressive
movements, from free speech to national liberation in South
America. This is what makes Paine the perennial revolutionary, not the
narrow-minded yeomen stuck intellectually in 1750 Norfolk. To
"functionally" apply Paine’s philosophy would entail a level of
democratic rule that is scarce in the world, evidenced by struggles
for democracy around the world, including the US. It would mean the
implementation of FDR’s Economic Bill of Rights, or the abolition of
corrupt monarchies, including Britain, or an American government free
of oligarchic rule.



But despite the shortcomings of history, Paine has already won, not
failed. The conventional wisdom – although not necessarily in practice
but in ideals – was Paine’s wisdom: democracy (people, not elites,
should control government), a complete separation of church and state,
and a loosened, if not severed, grip of organized religion on society.



###Obscurantism




There is so much more to untangle from Clark’s gnarled analysis. Here
are a few misinterpretations, negative spins, and false claims not
already mentioned:

*  "Paine was widely read in his day, but a politically aware mass reading public was the creation of the Reformation and the 1640s, not the late eighteenth century". By denying that Paine created a mass reading public, he slurs over the fact that the reading public of the 1640s was confined to the elite - Paine enlarged that base to the majority.

* "Although he had worked as an artisan, he never attributed to artisans, even urban artisans, any special political character or role." Eric Foner’s documentation on this to the contrary is sound, and issues like the Bank of Pennsylvania cannot be explained outside the political stance of the mechanics of Philadelphia, where Paine’s support was.

* "Although Paine protested against the cruelty and misconduct of governments, especially in their colonies, he never systematized these critiques to protest against ‘imperialism’ or ‘colonialism’, concepts that derived from the economic theory of the late nineteenth century."  Again, because Paine didn’t use the term ‘colonialism’ his opposition to British plunder and rule doesn’t count because he did not systematize it, as if America was not a colony. Paine stood in the middle of the first great anti-colonial struggle, yet Clark cannot find a link to more modern forms of colonialism.

* *Rights of Man* "contained no worked out theory of natural rights".  
  From *Rights of Man*:  
  > "Every history of the Creation, and every traditionary account,
    whether from the lettered or unlettered world, however they may
    vary in their opinion or belief of certain particulars, all agree
    in establishing one point, the unity of man; by which I mean that
    men are all of one degree, and consequently that all men are born
    equal, and with equal natural rights, in the same manner as if
    posterity had been continued by creation instead of generation,
    the latter being only the mode by which the former is carried
    forward; and consequently, every child born into the world must be
    considered as deriving its existence from God. The world is as new
    to him as it was to the first man that existed, and his natural
    right in it is of the same kind."
    
  And:
  
  > "Hitherto we have spoken only (and that but in part) of the natural rights of man.  We have now to consider the civil rights of man, and to show how the one originates from  the other. Man did not enter into society to become worse than he was before, nor to have  fewer rights than he had before, but to have those rights better secured. His natural   rights are the foundation of all his civil rights. But in order to pursue this distinction with  more precision, it is necessary to make the different qualities of natural and civil rights.
  >  
  > A few words will explain this. Natural rights are those which apper tain to man in right  of his existence. Of this kind are all the intellectual  rights, or rights of the mind, and also  all those rights of acting as an individual for his own comfort and happiness, which are  not injurious to the natural rights of others. Civil rights are those which appertain to man in right of his being a member of society.
  >  
  > Every civil right has for its foundation some natural right pre-existing in the individual,  but to the enjoyment of which his individual power is not, in all cases, sufficiently  competent. Of this kind are all those which relate to security and protection.
  >  
  > From this short review, it will be easy to distinguish between that class of natural rights  which man retains after entering into society, and those which he throws into the  common stock as a member of society.
  >  
  > The natural rights which he retains, are all those in which the power to execute is as  perfect in the individual as the right itself. Among this class, as is before mentioned, are  all the intellectual rights, or rights of the mind: consequently, religion is one of those  rights.
  >  
  > The natural rights which are not retained, are all those in which, though the right is  perfect in the individual, the power to execute them is defective. They answer not his  purpose. A man, by natural right, has a right to judge in his own cause; and so far as the  right of the mind is concerned, he never surrenders it: but what availeth it him to judge, if he has not power to redress ? He therefore deposits his right in the common stock of society, and takes the arm of society, of which he is a part, in preference and in addition  to his own. Society grants him nothing.
  >  
  > Every man is proprietor in society, and draws on the capital as a matter of right. From  these premises, two or three certain conclusions will follow.
  >  
  > First, That every civil right grows out of a natural right; or, in other words, is a natural  right exchanged.
  >  
  > Secondly, That civil power, properly considered as such, is made up of the aggregate of  that class of the natural rights of man, which becomes defective in the individual in point of power, and answers not his purpose, but when collected to a focus, becomes competent to the purpose of every one.
  >  
  > Thirdly, That the power produced from the aggregate of natural rights, imperfect in power in the individual, cannot be applied to invade the natural rights which are retained in the individual, and in which the power to execute is as perfect as the right itself.
  >  
  > We have now, in a few words, traced man from a natural individual  to a member of  society, and shown, or endeavored to show, the quality of the natural rights retained, and  those which are exchanged for civil rights. Let us now apply those principles to governments."
  >
  
  This seems like a worked out theory of natural rights far beyond the 1750 English  political discussions of Paine’s youth.  

* Clark even questions Paine’s legacy in freethought: "Only in the history of English freethinking did Paine enjoy a posthumous prominence; but freethinking was to lead via agnosticism to atheism, positions that the deist Paine had repudiated." Clark fails to see the legacy that Paine has in the freethought movement is his stance against organized religion. The Age of Reason still inspires new freethinkers and remains the enchiridion of freethought.

* Paine "has written nothing in condemnation of British ‘colonialism’ or ‘imperialism’; indeed he had been an enthusiastic combatant in the war of 1756-1763…" A teenage sailor was "enthusiastic" about extending the British empire? e,e, cummings was a soldier in W.W. I, so that proves he really wasn’t an anti-war poet?

* Paine’s famous quote "We have it in our power to begin the world over again." from *Common Sense* is reduced by Clark to a sermon from the pulpit: "In a secular sense this was impossible, and his pamphlet demands interpretation not as a prophetic emancipation but as a product of Paine’s English religious experience, mobilized in a new context." This ignores the fact that this phrase summed up Paine’s detailed argument of how America can break free of the old Europe and invent its own government philosophy free of privilege and anciens regimes. And in a secular sense it did prove possible, and has inspired nascent revolutionary movements ever since.

* Clark claims Paine was not aware of the link between the American and French Revolutions until Part II of *Rights of Man*. But his letters to Rush and Washington in 1790 and 1791 refute that. He states that to debunk Paine’s supposed self-image as "progenitor of revolutions", but Paine describes himself as a servant to the cause, never its originator, even as he proposed ideas that were original in their application. Clark goes on to deny any effect on France from the American Revolution anyway, which stands opposed to the fact that revolutionary leaders in France paid homage to American leaders, including Paine.


And there are dozens of other poorly supported statements, easily refuted:


* "Paine moved in a cultural cocoon."

* "He wrote nothing to show that he recognized anything essentially different about American culture." And then he contradicts himself later with: "What attuned Paine with the American population was his use of English religious imagery and argument" but states he hid his deistic views, showing a sophisticated awareness of American culture at the time of *Common Sense*.

* Clark speaks of a passage in *Rights of Man* where Paine uses an account from Lafayette, describing it as "awkwardly inserted" and Paine "unknowingly swallowed" the "self-serving" account.

* After 1802 on Paine’s return to America, "Paine persisted in a lurid binary view of American party politics, a view still indebted to the English polarity that dated from the Exclusion Crisis of the 1680s." The binary view was the struggle between two ideologies, Federalism and Republicanism, being fought out in America. To stretch that back to the Exclusion Crisis is creative, although myopic. 

* "Two revolutions had made little difference to his core beliefs; although he extrapolated those beliefs in a few areas, he seldom did so logically or systematically."

* "...he became open to the idea of bicameral assemblies, although this again echoed the Westminster model rather than the new American states." It echoed neither because his openness was not to bicameralism, as in Lords and Senates, but to having assemblies debate separately and come together afterwards to pass laws. Paine objected strenuously to the idea of a House of Lords or a Senate, and said so consistently. 

* "...his celebrity in his lifetime is more difficult to explain". Only in Clark’s world is this easy to imagine.



John Adams was a major ideological opponent of Paine, because Adams
regarded Paine as a threat for being "so democratical". He summarized
Paine’s role in history as he was experiencing it: "I know not whether
any man in the world has had more influence on its inhabitants or
affairs or the last thirty years than Tom Paine. There can no severer
satyr on the age. For such a mongrel between pig and puppy, begotten
by a wild boar on a bitch wolf, never before in any age of the world
was suffered by the poltroonery of mankind, to run through such a
career of mischief. Call it then the Age of Paine." It seems that
Clark is channeling Adams. Like Adams, Clark can’t understand why
Paine is so popular.  It is clear from even his opponents of the day
that Paine was an impactful player, his philosophy was threatening the
old regimes, and he was unleashing forces the old guard could not
control. It appears Clark has the same grudges. He would rather
slander than explain, bear false witness than show scholarship.

Or perhaps Clark’s essay was meant as farce, a lampooning of
conservative interpretations of Thomas Paine. If it was not meant that
way, he has still provided one.

As if by accidental metaphor, Paine refuses to remain buried.

> "Slander belongs to the class of dastardly vices. It always acts under cover. It puts insinuation in the place of evidence, and tries to impose by pretending to believe." - Thomas Paine
