Title: Thomas Paine's Legacy of Equality by Ray Polin
Slug: aboutpaine/thomas-paine-s-legacy-of-equality-by-ray-polin
Date: Mon Aug  4 09:08:54 EDT 2014

   by Raymond Polin and Constance Polin

   (The late Dr. Raymond Polin was Professor Emeritus of Government and
   Politics, St. John's University, New York; and Mrs. Polin is a library
   researcher and co-author-editor of their work Representative American
   Political Thought)

   Speech delivered at the Thomas Paine Day events in New Rochelle, NY on
   June 4, 2000, and reprinted from the Inaugural Edition of TPNHA's Journal
   in the Fall of 2000.

    

   Mr. Chairman, honored guests, and fellow admirers of Thomas Paine,

    
        What we propose to do first in our brief remarks is to make some
   comparisons between Thomas Paine and Thomas Jefferson, and for good
   measure later on throw in a snippet from George Mason, father of our
   Constitution's Bill of Rights. When we mention Jefferson, what first comes
   to mind is the Declaration of Independence, adopted on the Fourth of July
   1776. We thrill to recollection of its stirring words in the way we do
   when we see our beautiful American flag. But we feel also a bit uneasy
   about one of its familiar assertions- as when we hear a false note played
   or sung in an otherwise fine performance - for how can we accept as a
   self-evident truth that "all men are created equal?" We know we are not
   equal in ability, strength, swiftness, possessions, or reputation. Then we
   comfort ourselves by thinking Jefferson must have meant we are equal in
   the sight of God and therefore created equal in our endowed rights,
   especially in our inalienable rights to life, liberty, and the opportunity
   that are prerequisite for the "pursuit of happiness."
    
        But though we are usually rather satisfied with such an explanation
   of universal equality in the Declaration, because adherents of democracy
   favor what we call "equal justice", we should not be too accepting of it.
   For there was another fundamental meaning of equality that was more
   apparent in America in 1776, but one that we have largely lost sight of.
    
        If we think of equality in terms of alikeness, we begin to comprehend
   its broader import when employed by Paine, Mason, and Jefferson. And
   created is the word critical to our understanding of this equality or
   alikeness. Remember, the then widely popular King James Version of the Old
   Testament reads in Genesis I:27: "God created man in his own image." But
   from what was man created? Some theologians interpret the Old Testament to
   say God created man from common clay (or dust) and woman (so called
   because "she was taken out of Man") from one of Adam's ribs. Also, since
   antiquity it has generally been recognized that man was regularly
   "created" or generated by co-activity of a human male and female gametes.
   Therefore, when it was said all men and women are thus generated, gestated
   in a woman's womb,  and born through natural parturition or Caesarian
   section, it was an espousal of the deistic view of "Nature's God" and
   ways. And before going further, we should note that "man" as used by
   Paine, Mason, and Jefferson probably meant species - mankind, or humankind
   - not necessarily the male gender.
    
        What was the fuss about, then? These truths about the manner of birth
   were indeed self-evident about all humanity. Where does inequality come
   in, so that inequality has to be denied, which is done by demonstrating
   equality? We find the answer when we distinguish between nobility and
   commoners - and therefore also between subjects of a superior ruler and
   citizens of a free state. They were viewed as different breeds. The nobles
   (often called aristocrats) were pretended to be "blue bloods" descended
   from "gods" who had originated a different lineage here on earth that set
   them apart from the "commoners" who were descended from common clay. Some
   of this is recorded in the account you may read for yourself in Genesis
   VI: 2-4.
    
        George Bernard Shaw also gives us a glimpse of this long held, but
   now, thankfully, neglected belief when, before the start of Act I of his
   Caesar and Cleopatra, he has Balzanor proclaim: "Peasants, brought up to
   scare crows and follow the plough! Sons of smiths and tanners! And we
   nobles, consecrated to arms, descended from the gods!"
    
        We should pause a moment gathered here, therefore, to honor also the
   memory of the martyred Richard Rumbold (1622-1685)) and the heroic words
   he spoke as his life was about to be cruelly ended: "I never would believe
   that Providence had sent a few men into the world, ready booted and
   spurred to ride, and millions ready saddled and bridled to be ridden."
    
        Now originally, the triple thrust of the grievances of the American
   colonists had been: against the taxation and control exercised over them
   by the British Parliament and government; an assertion of autonomy in
   domestic affairs; and an argument that the common connection with England
   and other parts of the Empire was through the Crown (that is, they shared
   the same king). When independence - separation from Great Britain (most
   effectively advocated by Thomas Paine in Common Sense) - became the avowed
   objective, the American colonial leaders and spokesmen were shrewd enough
   to make their new propaganda target King George III, an easier symbol to
   rouse hatred and armed resistance. So Paine used Common Sense to convince
   the American colonists that to be fully independent and free, the King and
   what he stood for had to be discarded. A republican form of government had
   to replace monarchy and nobility. But what is a republic? It is a res
   republica, Latin for "a people's thing": meaning that the people, as
   citizens, own the government, and so no one may possess or inherit any
   public office. Therefore, they cannot be subjects - that is, property - of
   any king or nobleman. Kings and nobles had to be swept away by declaring
   we are all born in like manner and are of like kind. Had Paine and Mason
   had their way, "persons of color" would have been included, slavery would
   have ended with feudal distinctions, and there would have been no Civil
   War; and Paine at least would also have included women as endowed with
   equal rights.
    
        Thus, in Common Sense, Paine, a deeply devout, deistic-Quaker writes
   early on: "Mankind being originally equals in the order of creation, the
   equality could only be destroyed by some subsequent circumstance..." And
   thus, in the Virginia Bill of Rights adopted in June of 1776 (and an
   important influence on Jefferson in the writing of the Declaration of
   Independence and James Madison in the drafting of the Constitution's Bill
   of Rights), George Mason states: "That no man, or set of men, are entitled
   to exclusive or separate emoluments or privileges from the community, but
   in consideration of public services; which, not being descendible, neither
   ought the offices of magistrate, legislator, or judge to be hereditary."
    
        Accordingly, the concepts of equality of birth and of kind give us
   the fuller meaning of "created equal" and are basic elements of the
   constitutional, legal, and ideological key to freedom and justice in all
   their now familiar forms and ways so dear to Americans. Present-day
   hereditary rulers, whether utilized as nominal figureheads or active
   exercisers of governmental power, are all on borrowed time. Therefore,
   that you may by yourself continue our little discourse, we call to your
   attention a recent thoughtful publication in England by a young journalist
   who returned there after an assignment of some years in the United States
   and who cites Thomas Paine to good advantage. We recommend Jonathan
   Freedland's Bring Home the Revolution: The Case for a British Republic
   (London: Fourth Estate, 1998). Read it and you wi1l enrich your
   understanding of Thomas Paine's legacy of equality: the opening key to the
   freedom, justice, and pursuit of happiness we Americans cherish and
   memorialize here today. We thank you.
